# DDEC-6 Run Script
## chargemol
This program performs atomic population analysis to determine DDEC net atomic charges, atomic spin moments, and bond orders. Because the DDEC net atomic charges are simultaneously optimized to reproduce atomic chemical states and the electrostatic potential surrounding a material, they are well-suited for constructing force-fields used in atomistic simulations (e.g., classical molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo simulations) and for quantifying electron transfer between atoms in complex materials and during chemical reactions.

The program analyzes electron and spin density distributions generated by a quantum chemistry (e.g., DFT, coupled-cluster, etc.) calculation performed with a software such as VASP, Gaussian 09, CP2K, GPAW, SIESTA, ONETEP, etc.

The program is written in Fortran and parallelized using OpenMP. The program can be run in serial (one-processor) or parallel (multi-processor) modes. 

## Source code
Github:
> https://github.com/berquist/chargemol

Sourceforce:
> https://sourceforge.net/projects/ddec/files/

## Usage
1. Compiling the `chargemol` source code
2. Copy the `atomic_densities` fold of installation package of in your `bin` fold
3. Put the `DDEC6-slurm-run.py` in your main working fold
4. Modify the following parameters in the script to suit your environment
```python
CHARGEMOL_EXEC = "/home/user/bin/Chargemol_09_26_2017_linux_parallel"
DEFAULT_ATOMIC_DENSITIES = "/home/user/bin/atomic_densities/"
SBATCH_CONFIG = {
    "partition": "CPU",
    "nodes": 1,
    "ntasks_per_node": 4,
    "time": "01:00:00",
}
```
5. Prepare the executable files in the subfolder; here, we’ll use vasp as an example:

   Run the `VASP` program to produce the `AECCAR0`, `AECCAR2`, and `CHGCAR`, along with other files.
   To obtain the core electron density and valence electron density file of `AECCAR0`, `AECCAR2`, the INCAR settings must include the following:
   
    ```bash
    NSW = 0
    LCHARG = .TRUE.
    LAECHG = .TRUE. 
    PREC = Accurate
    ```
    
6. Run the script using the following command `python3 DDEC6-slurm-run.py` to prepare the job submission.  After running the script, a folder named `DDEC6_run` will be created in each leaf folder containing the core electron density and valence electron density files, and all files required for the run will be copied there. The `POTCAR` file will be modified. the Chargemol job script `job_control.txt` and task submission script `submit.slurm` will then be generated.

7. If you wish to prepare and submit job in batches, please run `python3 DDEC6-run.py --submit`
Chargemol_09_26_2017_linux_parallel
8. If the software cannot be compiled, please use the binary file of `Chargemol_09_26_2017_linux_parallel` in the `linux` fold of `compiled_binaries`of installation package. Place the binary file `Chargemol_09_26_2017_linux_parallel` in the user’s bin directory and grant it executable permissions.

## Citation and License information
`Chargemol` software is distributed under the license described below, which is compliant with the Open Source Initiative found at http://www.opensource.org/docs/osd. 

- for the calculation of DDEC6 atomic charges, please cite:
>T. A. Manz and N. Gabaldon Limas, "Introducing DDEC6 atomic population analysis: part 1. Charge partitioning theory and methodology," RSC Adv., 6 (2016) 47771-47801.

>N. Gabaldon Limas and T. A. Manz, "Introducing DDEC6 atomic population analysis: part 2. Computed results for a wide range of periodic and nonperiodic materials," RSC Adv., 6 (2016) 45727-45747.

If desired, you can also cite references listed below for the DDEC3 and earlier methods.

- for the calculation of DDEC3 atomic charges, please cite: 
> T. A. Manz and D. S. Sholl, “Improved Atoms-in-Molecule Charge Partitioning Functional for Simultaneously Reproducing the Electrostatic Potential and Chemical States in Periodic and Non-Periodic Materials,” J. Chem. Theory Comput. 8 (2012) 2844-2867.

>  T. A. Manz and D. S. Sholl, “Chemically Meaningful Atomic Charges that Reproduce the Electrostatic Potential in Periodic and Nonperiodic Materials,” J. Chem. Theory Comput. 6 (2010) 2455- 2468.

- for the calculation of RMSE and RRMSE, please cite:
> T. A. Manz and D. S. Sholl, “Improved Atoms- in-Molecule Charge Partitioning Functional for Simultaneously Reproducing the Electrostatic Potential and Chemical States in Periodic and Non-Periodic Materials,” J. Chem. Theory Comput. 8 (2012) 2844-

> T. Watanabe, T. A. Manz, and D. S. Sholl, “[Accurate Treatment of Electrostatics during Molecular Adsorption in Nanoporous Crystals without Assigning Point Charges to Framework Atoms,](https://doi.org/10.1021/jp201075u)” J.  Phys. Chem. C, 115 (2011) 4824 – 4836.

- for the calculation of atomic spin moments, please cite: 
>T. A. Manz and D. S. Sholl, “Methods for Computing Accurate Atomic Spin Moments for Collinear and Noncollinear Magnetism in Periodic and Nonperiodic Materials,” J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7 (2011) 4146-4164.

- for the calculation of bond orders, please cite:
>T. A. Manz, “Introducing DDEC6 atomic population analysis: part 3. Comprehensive method to compute bond orders,” RSC Adv., 7 (2017) 45552-45581.

- In addition to the scientific papers described in # 5 above, please cite this software program as following:
> T. A. Manz and N. Gabaldon Limas, Chargemol program for performing DDEC analysis, Version 3.5, 2017, ddec.sourceforge.net.
